hello thank you Alex so much that was
perfect he totally nailed it I am so
honored to receive this award and and so
happy that it gave me the chance to
visit Ireland my only other trip here
was with President Obama in 2011 where I
spent the entire time making speech
edits in a windowless office that could
have just as easily been in Dublin Ohio
I honestly wouldn't have known the
difference at all and I'm especially
excited to be here on st. Patrick's Day
weekend I also want to thank whoever
changed the time of this event from 5
p.m. to 3 p.m. so I could avoid the
embarrassment of speaking to a
completely empty room we're not as big
on rugby in the United States but I can
tell you if then my Boston Red Sox were
in the World Series and David Ortiz was
retiring today I'd already be 5 beers
deep at the nearest pub so so I won't go
on too long for us like most people who
put words together for a living I have
loved and hated writing for as long as I
can remember but I didn't connect
writing with politics and speeches until
right after college I took a job as an
entry-level assistant on John Kerry's
presidential campaign and by chance I
ended up sitting next to his chief
speechwriter I thought he had the
greatest job in the world I also thought
it was the kind of job that other people
did people who were older smarter and
more connected so I just worked hard I
kept my head down and I tried to learn
as much as I could from him and one day
I finally got the courage to ask if I
could be his deputy speechwriter and he
immediately said no
but then one day after that when the
campaign was almost broke and couldn't
afford to hire a real speechwriter I
became the most affordable option so a
few months later when John Kerry
accepted the Democratic nomination for
president at the 2004 convention in
Boston I was assigned the task of making
sure that all the convention speeches
reflected the message of Kerry campaign
in one day I get a call from our chief
speechwriter who told me that there was
a problem with the draft keynote address
being given by the young state senator
from Illinois Barack Obama apparently
Obama had written a line in his keynote
that John Kerry wanted to use in his
acceptance speech so I was told that I
had to go introduce my 23 year old self
to Obama and personally asked him to
change the line in his speech the day
before he delivered it thanks a lot boss
so I sheepishly walked into the room
where Obama was practicing his speech
mumbled something about the line and
then blacked out for a few seconds and
when I came to Obama was glaring down at
me within an inch of my face and he said
are you seriously trying to tell me that
I have to take out my favorite line in
this speech so great first impression
with my future boss totally nailed it
and you know at that point I figured I
would never talk to Barack Obama again
and what that was too bad because when I
heard his keynote the next night I
thought it represented everything that
was missing from politics for so long I
had been used to hearing politicians
speak in the same sound bites and
cliches rattling off a checklist of
issues that polled well but came off
flat and sounded sort of phony but
Barack Obama told a story that night he
linked his probable improbable journey
with America's and painted a vivid
picture of a more hopeful future it was
honest it was authentic for the first
time in the whole campaign I was sure we
would win and make a real difference in
people's lives and then John Kerry lost
and I was crushed I was 23 years old but
I became desperately cynical about
politics and what it could do I wanted
to give it all up
at that point I sort of had to because I
was completely broke so broke that when
I drove home to Boston to move back in
with my parents I didn't have enough
money to pay the last toll on the
highway and had to speed right through
the light so that was rock bottom then a
couple of weeks later I received an
email that changed my life one of my
bosses from the Kerry campaign was now a
top aide to Senator Barack Obama and
told me that he was looking to hire his
very first speechwriter my interview
with Obama was surprisingly easy we
talked about our families and where we
grew up we talked about why we got into
politics but most of all we didn't talk
about the line that I took out of his
convention speech because he didn't
remember it was me at the end of the
conversation he said something I'll
never forget
he said well I still don't think I need
a speechwriter but you seem nice enough
so let's give this a shot
and that's how I got the job so for
eight years I had the chance to learn
about writing from one of the very best
I can still remember the night I left
the office to write my very first Obama
speech he yelled after me fabs I know
it's your first speech and I know you're
probably worried and I know you're
probably anxious but know this I'm a
writer too
sometimes the muse strikes sometimes it
doesn't
things don't work out come in tomorrow
and the two of us will work through it
together and that's how he was for eight
years the president taught me more than
I could have ever imagined about writing
and storytelling he taught me that
crafting a simple logical argument was
more important than a snappy slogan or
catchy applause line he taught me that
shorter is always better reminding me
more than once that Abraham Lincoln fit
the Gettysburg Address
address on the back of a napkin he
taught me the value of honesty and
authenticity in writing after delivering
one of the most candid heartfelt
politically risky speeches on race in
America he said to me I don't know if
you can get elected president saying the
things I did about race today but I also
know that I don't deserve to be
President if I don't say the things that
I believe
but I think the most important lesson
that I learned from President Obama was
about the power of storytelling to
instill a sense of hope and why that's
so important right now
we live in very cynical times and that's
partly because we are constantly being
fed a steady stream of bad news
scan the headlines on any given day and
you're bound to see story after story
about a problem that can't be solved a
war that won't end a disease we can't
cure a plane we can't find a politician
a celebrity or CEO who has lied or
cheated or let us down in any number of
ways these stories are real mostly and
the media keeps feeding us these
headlines because we click on them but
as a consequence we don't get enough
good news we don't hear as much about
the hundreds of millions around the
world who've been lifted from extreme
poverty since the turn of the century we
don't hear about declining crime rates
or reduction in HIV infections or the
billions who gained access to clean
water and basic sanitation thanks to the
generosity and commitment of the global
community it doesn't make the front
pages when someone's life is saved
because she finally could afford health
insurance for the first time or when a
poor child escapes a bad neighborhood
thanks to a dedicated teacher the news
will record every instance of a public
figures mistakes but it cannot possibly
capture the daily countless examples of
ordinary men and women who show kindness
to a stranger or forgiveness when
wronged or love without condition and
the news simply does not have the
capacity to fully Chronicle the slow
painful and often frustrating pace that
real peace and progress has always
required that's why we need storytelling
that instills a sense of hope and that's
a job for the world's writers and poets
for its artists and dreamers for its
students and activists and youthful
idealist
of every age the people of Ireland
understand this better than most despite
a long legacy
of hardship and adversity or more likely
because of it this small island has
produced an incredible number of
history's greatest storytellers who were
today celebrated as some of your
greatest heroes
Joyce Beckett Swift Shaw Wilde Yates
Haney and of course those courageous
Irish monks who rescued our civilization
stories from the dark ages like these
proud ancestors and so many other
graduates of UCD I know that many of you
will go on to make an indelible impact
on our world and the best advice I can
give you is this whatever change you
want to bring about whatever career you
want to pursue whatever cause you want
to champion don't let anyone else's
cynicism be your excuse for not trying
after that disappointing election in
2004 I can still remember the moment
when I finally let go of that cynicism
it was the night of the 2008 election
but it wasn't when they called the race
for Barack Obama it was before that as I
was making final edits to the victory
speech the draft ended with a story we
found about a woman from Atlanta Georgia
named Ann Nixon Cooper who had waited in
line for three hours that day to cast
her ballot and what made the story so
special was that Ann Nixon Cooper was a
hundred and six years old born at a time
when she wasn't allowed to vote for two
reasons because she was a woman and
because she was african-american so we
ended the speech by tracing all the
seemingly impossible change she had
witnessed over the course of her life
civil rights voting rights workers
rights women's rights now as they
started calling the states on election
night someone pointed out to me that we
should probably contact and Nixon Cooper
and find out if she's okay with Barack
Obama telling her story so our campaign
researchers dig up her number and I give
her a call and I tell this frail 106
year old woman that a man who's about to
become the first african-american
president of the United States wanted to
mention her in his victory speech
and she paused for a while and then she
said
will it be on television and I told her
yes it would be on television and then
she thought about that for a while and
she asked me which channel will it be on
and I said all the channels and then she
said I'm so proud of him and I'm so
proud of us and she started to cry and
at that point so did I and right at that
moment they called Ohio the race was
over everyone started cheering and I hid
under my desk so I could talk to and NYX
and Cooper for a few more minutes seamus
heaney once said if you have the words
there's always a chance that you'll find
the way on their own hopeful stories and
writing that inspires can't solve the
world's problems or shield us from the
hardship and heartache that's just part
of life by reminding us of the progress
we've made in the past and the
possibilities that exist in the future
words can guide us push us forward and
at the very least encourage us to try
thank you very much for this honor and
I'm very happy to take your
you